.TH "cmbuild" 1 "@RELEASEDATE@" "@PACKAGE@ @RELEASE@" "@PACKAGE@ Manual"

.SH NAME
.TP 
cmbuild - construct a CM from an RNA multiple sequence alignment

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B cmbuild
.I [options]
.I cmfile
.I alifile

.SH DESCRIPTION

.B cmbuild
read an RNA multiple sequence alignment from
.I alifile,
constructs a covariance model (CM),
and saves the CM to
.I cmfile.

.PP
The alignment file must be in Stockholm format, and
must contain consensus secondary structure annotation.
.B cmbuild
uses the consensus structure to determine the architecture
of the CM. 

.PP
The alignment file may be a database containing more than one
alignment.  If so, the resulting
.I cmfile
will be a database of CMs, one per alignment.

.PP
The expert options 
.B --ctarget, --cmindiff, 
and 
.B --call
result in multiple CMs being built from each alignment in
.I alifile
as described below.

.SH OUTPUT
The default output from 
.B cmbuild
is tabular, with a single line printed for each model . Each line has
the following fields: 
.B aln:
the index of the alignment used to build the CM, 
.B "cm idx:"
the index of the CM in the
.I cmfile; 
.B name: 
the name of the CM, 
.B nseq: 
the number of sequences in the
alignment used to build the CM, 
.B eff_nseq:
the effective number of
sequences used to build the model (see the User Guide); 
.B alen:
the length of the alignment used to build the CM; 
.B clen:
the number of columns from the alignment defined as consensus columns;
.B "rel entropy, CM:"
the total relative entropy of the model divided by
the number of consensus columns;
.B "rel entropy, HMM:"
the total relative entropy of the model 
.I ignoring secondary structure
divided by the number of consensus columns.

.SH OPTIONS

.TP
.B -h
Print brief help; includes version number and summary of
all options, including expert options.

.TP
.BI -n " <s>"
Name the covariance model 
.I <s>. 
(Does not work if 
.I alifile
contains more than one alignment).
The default is to use the name of the alignment 
(given by the #=GF ID tag, in Stockholm format),
or if that is not present, to use the name of
the alignment file minus any file type extension plus a "-" and a positive
integer indicating the position of that alignment in the file
(that is, the first alignment in a file "myrnas.sto" would give
a CM named "myrnas-1", the second alignment would give a CM named "myrnas-2").

.TP
.BI -A
Append the CM to 
.I cmfile,
if
.I cmfile
already exists.

.TP
.BI -F
Allow 
.I cmfile
to be overwritten. Normally, if
.I cmfile
already exists, 
.B cmbuild 
exits with an error unless the
.I -A
or 
.I -F
option is set.

.TP
.BI -v
Run in verbose output mode instead of using the 
default single line tabular format. This output format is similar to
that used by older versions of Infernal.

.TP
.B --iins
Allow informative insert emissions for the CM.
By default, all CM insert emission scores are set to 0.0 bits.
The motivation for zero bit scores is 
to avoid high-scoring hits to low complexity sequence favored by high 
insert state emission scores.

.TP
.BI --Wbeta "<x>"
Set the beta tail loss probability for query-dependent banding (QDB) to 
.I "<x>"
The QDB algorithm is used to determine the maximium length of a hit to
the model. For more information on QDB see 
(Nawrocki and Eddy, PLoS Computational Biology 3(3): e56). 
The beta paramater is the amount of
probability mass considered negligible during band calculation, lower
values of beta will result in shorter maximum hit lengths, which will
yield faster searches.
The default beta is 1E-7: determined
empirically as a good tradeoff between sensitivity, specificity  and speed.

.TP
.B --devhelp
Print help, as with  
.B "-h",
but also include undocumented developer options. These options are not
listed below. They are under development or experimental, and are not
guaranteed to even work correctly. Use developer options at your own
risk. The only resources for understanding what they actually do are
the brief one-line description printed when
.B "--devhelp"
is enabled, and the source code.

.SH EXPERT OPTIONS

.TP
.BI --rsearch " <f>"
Parameterize emission scores a la RSEARCH, using the RIBOSUM
matrix in file 
.I <f>.
Actually, the emission scores will not be exactly the RIBOSUM scores,
because of differences in the modelling strategy in @PACKAGE@ and
RSEARCH, but they will be as close as @PACKAGE@ can get.
RIBOSUM matrix files are included with @PACKAGE@ in the "matrices/"
subdirectory of the top-level @PACKAGE@ directory.
RIBOSUM matrices are substitution score matrices trained specifically
for structural RNAs with separate single stranded residue and base pair
substitution scores. For more information see the RSEARCH publication 
(Klein and Eddy, BMC Bioinformatics 4:44, 2003). Actually, the
emission scores will not exactly 

With 
.B --rsearch 
enabled, all alignments in 
.I alifile
must contain exactly one sequence or the
.B --call 
option must also be enabled. 

.TP
.BI --binary 
Save the model in a compact binary format. The default
is a more readable ASCII text format.

.TP
.B --rf
Use reference coordinate annotation (#=GC RF line, in Stockholm)
to determine which columns are consensus, and which are inserts.
Any non-gap character indicates a consensus column. (For example,
mark consensus columns with "x", and insert columns with ".".)
The default is to determine this automatically; if the
frequency of gap characters in a column is
greater than a threshold, gapthresh (default 0.5), the column
is called an insertion.

.TP
.BI --gapthresh " <x>"
Set the gap threshold (used for determining which columns
are insertions versus consensus; see 
.B --rf 
above) to 
.I <x>.
The default is 0.5.

.TP
.B --ignorant
Strip all base pair secondary structure information from all input
alignments in 
.I alifile
before building the CM(s). All resulting CM(s) will
have zero MATP (base pair) nodes, with zero bifurcations.

.TP 
.B --wgsc
Use the Gerstein/Sonnhammer/Chothia (GSC) weighting algorithm. This is the
default unless the number of sequences in the alignment exceeds a
cutoff (see
.B --pbswitch),
in which case the default becomes the faster Henikoff position-based
weighting scheme.

.TP 
.B --wblosum
Use the BLOSUM filtering algorithm to weight the sequences,
instead of the default GSC weighting.
Cluster the sequences at a given percentage identity (see
.B --wid);
assign each cluster a total weight of 1.0, distributed equally
amongst the members of that cluster.

.TP
.B --wpb
Use the Henikoff position-based weighting scheme. This weighting
scheme is automatically used (overriding 
.B --wgsc
and 
.B --wblosum) 
if the number of sequences in the alignment exceeds a cutoff (see
.B --pbswitch).

.TP 
.B --wnone
Turn sequence weighting off; e.g. explicitly set all
sequence weights to 1.0.

.TP
.B --wgiven
Use sequence weights as given in annotation in the input alignment
file. If no weights were given, assume they are all 1.0.  The default
is to determine new sequence weights by the
Gerstein/Sonnhammer/Chothia algorithm, ignoring any annotated weights.

.TP 
.BI --pbswitch " <n>"
Set the cutoff for automatically switching the weighting method to the Henikoff
position-based weighting scheme to 
.I <n>.
If the number of sequences in the alignment exceeds
.I <n>
Henikoff weighting is used. 
By default 
.I <n>
is 5000.

.TP 
.BI --wid " <x>"
Controls the behavior of the 
.I --wblosum 
weighting option by setting the percent identity for clustering the
alignment to
.I <x>.

.TP
.B --eent
Use the entropy weighting strategy to determine the effective sequence
number that gives a target mean match state relative entropy. This option 
is the default, and can be turned off with 
.B --enone.
The default target mean match state relative entropy is 0.59 bits but can be
changed with
.B --ere.
The default of 0.59 bits is automatically changed if the total
relative entropy of the model (summed match state relative entropy)
is less than a cutoff, which is
is 6.0 bits by default, but can be changed with the expert, undocumented
.B --eX 
option. If you really want to play with that option, consult the
source code.

.TP 
.B --enone
Turn off the entropy weighting strategy. The effective sequence number
is just the number of sequences in the alignment.

.TP 
.BI --ere " <x>"
Set the target mean match state entropy as 
.I <x>.
By default the target entropy 1.46 bits. This default value was
empirically determined as optimal in a RFAM based benchmark described
in (Nawrocki and Eddy, PLoS Computational Biology 3(3): e56, 2007).

.TP 
.BI --null " <f>"
Read a null model from 
.I <f>.
The null model defines the probability of each RNA nucleotide in
background sequence, the default is to use 0.25 for each nucleotide. 
The format of null files is documented in the User's Guide.

.TP
.BI --prior " <f>"
Read a Dirichlet prior from 
.I <f>, 
replacing the default mixture Dirichlet.
The format of prior files is documented in the User's Guide.

.TP
.BI --ctarget " <n>"
Cluster each alignment in 
.I alifile 
by percent identity. Find a cutoff percent id threshold 
that gives exactly 
.I <n>
clusters and build a separate CM from each cluster. If 
.I <n> 
is greater than the number of sequences in the alignment
the program will not complain, and each sequence in the alignment
will be its own cluster.  Each CM will have a positive integer
appended to its name indicating the order in which it was built. For
example, if 
.B cmbuild --ctarget 3
is called with 
.I alifile 
"myrnas.sto", and "myrnas.sto" has exactly one Stockholm alignment in
it with no #=GF ID tag annotation, three CMs will be built, the first
will be named "myrnas-1.1", the second, "myrnas-1.2", and the third "myrnas-1.3".
(As explained above for the 
.B -n
option, the first number "1" after "myrnas" indicates the
CM was built from the first alignment in "myrnas.sto".)

.TP
.BI --cmaxid " <x>"
Cluster each sequence alignment in 
.I alifile 
by percent identity. Define clusters at the cutoff fractional id similarity
of
.I <x>
and build a separate CM from each cluster. 
No two sequences will be be more than 
.I <x> 
fractionally identical (
.I <x>
* 100 percent identical) if those two sequences are in different
clusters.
The CMs are named as described above for
.B --ctarget.

.TP
.B --call
Build a separate CM from each sequence in each alignment in
.I alifile.
Naming of CMs takes place as described above for
.B --ctarget.
Using this option in combination with
.B --rsearch
causes a separate CM to be built and parameterized using a RIBOSUM
matrix for each sequence in 
.I alifile.

.TP
.B --corig
After building multiple CMs using 
.B --ctarget, --cmindiff
or
.B --call
as described above, build a final CM using the complete original
alignment from
.I alifile.
The CMs are named as described above for
.B --ctarget
with the exception of the final CM built from the original alignment
which is named in the default manner, without an appended integer. 

.TP
.BI --cdump "<f>"
Dump the multiple alignments of each cluster to
.I <f>
in Stockholm format.
This option only works in combination with
.B --ctarget, --cmindiff
or
.B --call.

.TP 
.BI --refine " <f>"
Attempt to refine the alignment before building the CM using
expectation-maximization (EM). A CM is first built from the initial
alignment as usual. Then, the sequences in the alignment are realigned
optimally (with the HMM banded CYK algorithm, optimal means optimal 
given the bands) to the CM, and a new CM is built
from the resulting alignment. The
sequences are then realigned to the new CM, and a new CM is built from
that alignment. This is continued until convergence, specifically when 
the alignments for two successive iterations are not significantly
different (the summed bit scores of all the sequences in the alignment
changes less than 1% between two successive iterations). The final
alignment (the alignment used to build the CM that gets written to 
.I cmfile)
is written to 
.I <f>.

.TP 
.B --gibbs
Modifies the behavior of
.B --refine 
so Gibbs sampling is used instead of EM. The difference is that
during the alignment stage the alignment is not necessarily optimal,
instead an alignment (parsetree) for each sequences is sampled from the
posterior distribution of alignments as determined by the Inside
algorithm. Due to this sampling step
.B --gibbs
is non-deterministic, so different runs with the same alignment may
yield different results. This is not true when 
.B --refine
is used without the 
.B --gibbs
option, in which case the final alignment and CM will always be the
same. When 
.B --gibbs 
is enabled, the 
.B -s " <n>" 
option can be used to seed the random number generator predictably,
making the results reproducible. 
The goal of the 
.B --gibbs
option is to help expert RNA alignment curators refine structural
alignments by allowing them to observe alternative high scoring
alignments. 

.TP
.BI -s " <n>"
Set the random seed to 
.I <n>, 
where 
.I <n> 
is a positive integer. This option can only be used in
combination with 
.B --gibbs. 
The default is to use time() to
generate a different seed for each run, which means that two different
runs of 
.B cmbuild --refine 
.I <f> 
--gibbs 
on the same alignment will give slightly different
results. You can use this option to generate reproducible results.

.TP
.B -l
With 
.B --refine,
turn on the local alignment algorithm, which allows the alignment
to span two or more subsequences if necessary (e.g. if the structures
of the query model and target sequence are only partially shared),
allowing certain large insertions and deletions in the structure
to be penalized differently than normal indels.
The default is to globally align the query model to the target
sequences.

.TP
.B -a
With 
.B --refine,
print the scores of each individual sequence alignment.

.TP
.B --cyk
With 
.B --refine,
align with the CYK algorithm. By default the optimal accuracy
algorithm is used. There is more information on this in the 
.B cmalign
manual page.

.TP
.BI --sub
With 
.B --refine,
turn on the sub model construction and alignment procedure. For each
sequence to be realigned an HMM is first used to predict the model start and end
consensus columns, and a new sub CM is constructed that only models
consensus columns from start to end. The sequence is then aligned to this sub CM.
This option is useful for building CMs for alignments with sequences that are known to
truncated, non-full length sequences. This option is experimental and
not rigorously tested, use at your own risk.
This "sub CM" procedure is not the same
as the "sub CMs" described by Weinberg and Ruzzo.

.TP
.BI --nonbanded
With 
.B --refine, 
do not use HMM bands to accelerate alignment.  Use the
full CYK algorithm which is guaranteed to give the optimal alignment. 
This will slow down the run significantly, especially for large models.

.TP
.BI --tau " <x>"
With 
.B --refine, 
set the tail loss probability used during HMM band calculation to
.I <f>. 
This is the amount of probability mass within the HMM posterior
probabilities that is considered negligible. The default value is 1E-7.
In general, higher values will result in greater acceleration, but
increase the chance of missing the optimal alignment due to the HMM
bands.

.TP
.B --fins
With
.B --refine,
change the 
behavior of how insert emissions are placed in the alignment. 
By default, all contiguous blocks of inserts are split in half, and
half the residues are flushed left against the nearest consensus
column to the left, and half are flushed right against the nearest
consensus column on the right. With
.B --fins
inserts are not split in half, instead all inserted residues from IL
states are flushed left, instead all inserted residues from IR states are
flushed right. This was the default behavior of previous versions of
@PACKAGE@.

.TP
.BI --mxsize " <x>"
With 
.B --refine, 
set the maximum allowable matrix size for alignment to 
.I <x>
megabytes. By default this size is 2 Gb. 
This should be large enough for the vast majority of alignments, 
however it is possible that when run with
.B --refine, cmbuild 
will exit prematurely, reporting an error message that 
the matrix exceeded it's maximum allowable size. In this case, the
.B --mxsize 
can be used to raise the limit.

.TP
.BI --rdump "<x>"
With 
.B --refine, 
output the intermediate alignments at each iteration of the refinement
procedure (as described above for
.B --refine
) to file
.I <f>.
