.TH "cmemit" 1 "@RELEASEDATE@" "@PACKAGE@ @RELEASE@" "@PACKAGE@ Manual"

.SH NAME
.TP 
cmemit - generate sequences from a covariance model

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B cmemit
.I [options]
.I cmfile
.I seqfile

.SH DESCRIPTION

.B cmemit
reads the covariance model(s) (CMs) in
.I cmfile
and generates a number of sequences from the CM(s);
or if the 
.B -c
option is selected, generates a single majority-rule
consensus. This can be useful for various application in which one
needs a simulation of sequences consistent with a sequence family
consensus. By default,
.B cmemit 
generates 10 sequences and outputs them in FASTA (unaligned) format to 
.I seqfile.

.SH GENERAL OPTIONS

.TP
.B -h
Print brief help; includes version number and summary of
all options, including expert options.

.TP
.BI -o " <f>" 
Save the synthetic sequences to file 
.I <f> 
rather than writing them to stdout. 

.TP
.BI -n " <n>"
Generate 
.I <n>
sequences. Default is 10. 

.TP
.B -u
Write the generated sequences in unaligned format (FASTA). This is the
default, so this option is probably useless.

.TP
.B -a
Write the generated sequences in an aligned format (STOCKHOLM) with
consensus structure annotation rather than FASTA. 

.TP
.B -c
Predict a single majority-rule consensus sequence instead of sampling
sequences from the CM\'s probability distribution. Highly conserved
residues (base paired residues that score higher than 3.0 bits, or
single stranded residues that score higher than 1.0 bits) are shown in
upper case; others are shown in lower case.

.TP
.B -l
Configure the CMs into local mode before emitting sequences. See the
User's Guide for more information on locally configured CMs.

.TP
.BI -s " <n>"
Set the random seed to 
.I <n>, 
where <n> is a positive integer. The default is to use time() to
generate a different seed for each run, which means that two different
runs of 
.B cmemit 
on the same CM will give different
results. You can use this option to generate reproducible results.


.TP
.B --devhelp
Print help, as with  
.B "-h",
but also include undocumented developer options. These options are not
listed below, are under development or experimental, and are not
guaranteed to even work correctly. Use developer options at your own
risk. The only resources for understanding what they actually do are
the brief one-line description printed when
.B "--devhelp"
is enabled, and the source code.

.SH EXPERT OPTIONS

.TP
.BI --rna
Specify that the emitted sequences be output as RNA sequences. This is true by default.

.TP
.BI --dna
Specify that the emitted sequences be output as DNA sequences. By default,
the output alphabet is RNA. 

.TP
.BI --tfile " <f>"
Dump tabular sequence parsetrees (tracebacks) for each 
emitted sequence to file 
.I <f>.
Primarily useful for debugging.

.TP
.BI --exp " <x>"
Exponentiate the emission and transition probabilities of the CM by
.I <x>
and then renormalize those distributions before emitting
sequences. This option changes the CM probability distribution of
parsetrees relative to default. With 
.I <x> 
less than 1.0 the emitted sequences will tend to have
lower bit scores upon alignment to the CM with
.B cmalign.
With <x> greater than 1.0, the emitted sequences will tend
to have higher bit scores upon alignment to
the CM. This bit score difference will increase as <x> moves
further away from 1.0 in either direction. 
If <x> equals 1.0, this option has no effect relative to default.
This option is useful for generating sequences that are either 
difficult (
.I <x> 
< 1.0) or easy (
.I <x> 
> 1.0) for the CM to
distinguish as homologous from background, random sequence.

.TP
.BI --begin " <n>"
Truncate the resulting alignment by removing all residues before consensus column 
.I <n>,
where <n> is a positive integer no greater than the consensus length of
the CM. Must be used in combination with 
.B --end 
and either 
.B -a 
or
.B --shmm
(a developer option).

.TP
.BI --end " <n>"
Truncate the resulting alignment by removing all residues after consensus column 
.I <n>,
where <n> is a positive integer no greater than the consensus length of
the CM. Must be used in combination with 
.B --begin 
and either 
.B -a 
or 
.B --shmm
(a developer option).



