.TH "cmalign" 1 "@RELEASEDATE@" "@PACKAGE@ @RELEASE@" "@PACKAGE@ Manual"

.SH NAME
.TP 
cmalign - use a CM to make a structured RNA multiple alignment

.SH SYNOPSIS

.TP
.B cmalign
.I [options]
.I cmfile
.I seqfile

.SH DESCRIPTION

.B cmalign
aligns the RNA sequences in
.I seqfile
to the covariance model (CM) in
.I cmfile,
and outputs a multiple sequence alignment.

.PP
The sequence file 
.I seqfile
must be in FASTA, EMBL, or Genbank format.

.PP
CMs are profiles of RNA consensus sequence and secondary structure. A
CM file is produced by the 
.B cmbuild 
program, from a given RNA sequence alignment of known 
consensus structure.

.PP
The alignment that 
.B cmalign
makes is written in Pfam Stockholm format in which each sequence
appears on a single line. It can be redirected to a file
using the
.B -o
option. Interleaved Stockholm format (which was created by earlier
versions of 
.B cmalign
) can be created with 
.B --ileaved.

.PP
.B cmalign 
uses an HMM banding technique to accelerate alignment by default as
described below for the
.B --hbanded 
option. HMM banding can be turned off with the 
.B --nonbanded
option.

.PP
By default, 
.B cmalign
computes the alignment with maximum
expected accuracy that is consistent with constraints (bands) derived
from an HMM, using a banded version of the Durbin/Holmes optimal accuracy algorithm.
This behavior can be changed, as described below and in
the User's Guide, with
the 
.B --cyk, 
.B --sample,
or
.B --viterbi 
options.

.PP
It is possible to include the fixed training alignment used to build
the CM within the output alignment of
.B cmalign.
This is done using the 
.B --withali 
option, as described below and in the User's Guide.

.PP
It is also possible to merge two or more alignments created by the
same CM using the Easel miniapp 
.B esl-alimerge
(included in the easel/miniapp/ subdirectory of infernal). Previous
versions of 
.B cmalign 
included options to merge alignments but they were deprecated upon development
of
.B esl-alimerge, 
which is significantly more memory efficient. 

.SH OUTPUT

.B cmalign
first outputs tabular information on the scores of each sequence being
aligned, then the alignment itself is printed. The alignment can be
redirected to an output file 
.I <f>
with the 
.BI -o " <f>"
option. 


The tabular output section includes one line per sequences and seven
fields per line: "seq idx": the index of the sequence in the input
file, "seq name": the sequence name, "len": the length of the
sequence, "total": the total bit score of the sequence, "struct": an
approximation of the contribution of the secondary structure to the
bit score, "avg prob": the average posterior probability (confidence
estimate) of each aligned residue, and "elapsed": the wall time spent
aligning the sequence.

The fields can change if different options are selected. For example
if the 
.B "--cyk"
option is enabled, the "avg prob" field disappears because
posterior probabilities are not calculated by the CYK algorithm.

The output alignment will be annotated with posterior probabilities
which estimate the confidence level of each aligned residue.  This
annotation appears as lines beginning with "#=GR <seq name> PP", one
per sequence, each immediately below the corresponding aligned
sequence "<seq name>". Characters in PP lines have 12 possible values:
"0-9", "*", or ".". If ".", the position corresponds to a gap in the
sequence. A value of "0" indicates a posterior probability of between
0.0 and 0.05, "1" indicates between 0.05 and 0.15, "2" indicates between 0.15
and 0.25 and so on up to "9" which indicates between 0.85 and 0.95. A
value of "*" indicates a posterior probability of between 0.95 and
1.0. Higher posterior probabilities correspond to greater confidence
that the aligned residue belongs where it appears in the alignment.
With
.B --nonbanded, 
the calculation of the posterior probabilities
considers all possible alignments of the target sequence to the
CM. Without 
.B --nonbanded
(in HMM banded mode), the calculation considers only possible
alignments within the HMM bands. The posterior annotation can be
turned off with the 
.B --no-prob 
option. If 
.B --small
or 
.B --viterbi 
is enabled, posterior annotation must also be turned off using
.B --no-prob.

.SH OPTIONS

.TP
.B -h
Print brief help; includes version number and summary of
all options, including expert options.

.TP
.BI -o " <f>"
Save the alignment in Stockholm format to a file
.I <f>.
The default is to write it to standard output.

.TP
.B -l
Turn on the local alignment algorithm, which allows the alignment
to span two or more subsequences if necessary (i.e. if the structures
of the query model and target sequence are only partially shared),
allowing certain large insertions and deletions in the structure
to be penalized differently than normal indels.
The default is to globally align the query model to the target
sequences.

.TP
.B -q
Quiet; suppress the verbose banner, and only print the resulting
alignment to stdout. This allows piping the alignment to the input 
of other programs, for example.

.TP 
.B --ileaved
Output the alignment in interleaved Stockholm format of a fixed width
that may be more convenient for reading. This was the default output
alignment format of previous versions of 
.B cmalign.

.TP
.BI -no-prob
Do not annotate the output alignment with posterior probabilities.

.TP
.BI --informat " <s>"
Assert that the input 
.I seqfile
is in format
.I <s>.
Do not run Babelfish format autodection. This increases
the reliability of the program somewhat, because 
the Babelfish can make mistakes; particularly
recommended for unattended, high-throughput runs
of @PACKAGE@. 
Acceptable formats are: FASTA, EMBL, UNIPROT, GENBANK, and DDBJ.
.I <s>
is case-insensitive.

.TP
.B --devhelp
Print help, as with  
.B "-h",
but also include undocumented developer options. These options are not
listed below, are under development or experimental, and are not
guaranteed to even work correctly. Use developer options at your own
risk. The only resources for understanding what they actually do are
the brief one-line description printed when
.B "--devhelp"
is enabled, and the source code.

.TP
.BI --mpi
Run as an MPI parallel program. This option will only be available if
@PACKAGE@
has been configured and built with the "--enable-mpi" flag (see User's
Guide for details).

.SH EXPERT OPTIONS

.TP
.B --optacc
Align sequences using the Durbin/Holmes optimal accuracy
algorithm. This is default behavior, so this option is probably useless. 
The optimal accuracy alignment will be constrained by HMM bands for acceleration
unless the
.B --nonbanded 
option is enabled. 
The optimal accuracy algorithm determines the alignment that
maximizes the posterior probabilities of the aligned residues within it.
The posterior probabilites are determined using (possibly HMM banded)  
variants of the Inside and Outside algorithms. 

.TP
.B --cyk
Do not use the Durbin/Holmes optimal accuracy alignment to align the
sequences, instead use the CYK algorithm which determines the
optimally scoring alignment of the sequence to the model. 

.TP
.B --sample
Sample an alignment from the posterior distribution of alignments.
The posterior distribution is determined using an HMM banded (unless 
.B --nonbanded)  
variant of the Inside algorithm. 

.TP
.BI -s " <n>"
Set the random number generator seed to 
.I <n>, 
where 
.I <n> 
is a positive integer. This option can only be used in
combination with 
.B --sample. 
The default is to use time() to
generate a different seed for each run, which means that two different
runs of 
.B cmalign --sample
on the same alignment will give slightly different
results. You can use this option to generate reproducible results.

.TP
.B --viterbi
Do not use the CM to align the sequences, instead use
the HMM Viterbi algorithm to align with a CM Plan 9 HMM. The HMM is
automatically constructed to be maximally similar to the CM. 
This HMM alignment is faster than CM alignment, but can be less accurate because the
structure of the RNA family is ignored. 

.TP
.BI --sub
Turn on the sub model construction and alignment procedure. For each
sequence, an HMM is first used to predict the model start and end
consensus columns, and a new sub CM is constructed that only models
consensus columns from start to end. The sequence is then aligned to this sub CM.
This option is useful for aligning sequences that are known to
truncated, non-full length sequences.
This "sub CM" procedure is not the same as the "sub CMs" described by
Weinberg and Ruzzo.

.TP
.B --small
Use the divide and conquer CYK alignment algorithm described in SR
Eddy, BMC Bioinformatics 3:18, 2002. The 
.B --nonbanded
option must be used in combination with this options.
Also, it is recommended whenever
.B --nonbanded
is used that 
.B --small 
is also used  because standard CM alignment without HMM banding requires a lot of
memory, especially for large RNAs.
.B --small
allows CM alignment within practical memory limits,
reducing the memory required for alignment LSU rRNA, the largest known
RNAs, from 150 Gb to less than 300 Mb.
This option can only be used in combination with
.B --nonbanded 
and
.B --cyk.

.TP
.B --hbanded
This option is turned on by default.
Accelerate alignment by pruning away regions of the CM DP matrix that
are deemed negligible by an HMM. 
First, each sequence is scored with a CM plan 9 HMM derived from the CM 
using the Forward and Backward HMM algorithms and calculate posterior
probabilities that each residue aligns to each state of the HMM. These 
posterior probabilities are used to derive constraints (bands) on the CM DP
matrix. Finally, the target sequence is aligned to the CM using the
banded DP matrix, during which cells outside the bands are ignored. Usually most
of the full DP matrix lies outside the bands 
(often more than 95%), making this technique faster because
fewer DP calculations are required, and more memory efficient because
only cells within the bands need be allocated. 

Importantly, HMM banding sacrifices the guarantee of determining the
optimally accurarte or optimal alignment, which will be missed if it lies outside the
bands. The tau paramater (analagous to the beta parameter for QDB
calculation in 
.B cmsearch
) is the amount of probability mass
considered negligible during HMM band calculation; lower
values of tau yield greater speedups but also a greater chance of missing
the optimal alignment. The default tau is 1E-7, determined
empirically as a good tradeoff between sensitivity and speed, though
this value can be changed with the
.B --tau " <x>" 
option. The level of acceleration increases with both the
length and primary sequence conservation level of the family. For
example, with 
the default tau of 1E-7, tRNA models (low primary sequence
conservation with length of about 75 residues) show about 10X acceleration,
and SSU bacterial rRNA models (high primary sequence conservation with
length of about 1500 residues) show about 700X. 
HMM banding can be turned off with the 
.B --nonbanded 
option.

.TP
.B --nonbanded
Turns off HMM banding. The returned alignment is guaranteed to be the
globally optimally accurate one (by default) or the globally optimally
scoring one (if 
.B --cyk
is enabled).
The 
.B --small
option is recommended in combination with this option, because
standard alignment without HMM banding requires a lot of memory (see
.B --small
).

.TP
.BI --tau " <x>"
Set the tail loss probability used during HMM band calculation to
.I <x>. 
This is the amount of probability mass within the HMM posterior
probabilities that is considered negligible. The default value is 1E-7.
In general, higher values will result in greater acceleration, but
increase the chance of missing the optimal alignment due to the HMM
bands.

.TP
.BI --mxsize " <x>"
Set the maximum allowable DP matrix size to 
.I <x>
megabytes. By default this size is 2,048 Mb. 
This should be large enough for the vast majority of alignments, 
however if it is not 
.B cmalign 
will exit prematurely and report an error message that 
the matrix exceeded it's maximum allowable size. In this case, the
.B --mxsize 
can be used to raise the limit.
This is most likely to occur when the
.B --nonbanded
option is used without the
.B --small 
option, but can still occur when
.B --nonbanded 
is not used.

.TP
.BI --rna
Output the alignments as RNA sequence alignments. This is true by default.

.TP
.BI --dna
Output the alignments as DNA sequence alignments. 

.TP
.B --matchonly
Only include match columns in the output alignment, do not include
any insertions relative to the consensus model. This option may
be useful when creating very large alignments that require a lot of
RAM and disk space, most of which is necessary only to deal with insert
columns that are mainly gaps in most sequences.

.TP
.B --resonly
Only include match columns in the output alignment that 
have at least 1 residue (non-gap character) in them. By default all match columns are
printed to the alignment, even those that are 100% gaps. 
.B --resonly
replicates the default behavior of previous versions of
.B cmalign.

.TP
.B --fins
Change the 
behavior of how insert emissions are placed in the alignment. 
By default, all contiguous blocks of inserts are split in half, and
half the residues are flushed left against the nearest consensus
column to the left, and half are flushed right against the nearest
consensus column on the right. With
.B --fins
inserts are not split in half, instead all inserted residues from IL
states are flushed left, and all inserted residues from IR states are
flushed right. 
.B --fins 
replicates the default behavior of previous versions of
.B cmalign.

.TP 
.BI --withali " <f>"
Reads an alignment from file 
.I <f>
and aligns it as a single object to the CM; e.g. the alignment in 
.I <f> 
is held fixed.
This allows you to align sequences to a model with 
.B cmalign
and view them in the context of an existing trusted multiple alignment.
The alignment in the file
.I <f> 
must be exactly the alignment that the CM was built from, or a subset
of it with the following special property: the definition of consensus
columns and consensus secondary structure must be identical between 
.I <f>
and the alignment the CM was built from. One easy way to achieve this
is to use the 
.B --rf
option to 
.B cmbuild
(see man page for 
.B cmbuild
) and to maintain the "#=GC RF" annotation in the alignment when
removing sequences to create the subset alignment 
.I <f>. 
To specify that the
.B --rf
option to 
.B cmbuild
was used, enable the
.B --rf
option to 
.B cmalign
(see 
.B --rf 
below).

.TP 
.B --withpknots
Must be used in combination with 
.BI --withali " <f>".
Propogate structural information for any pseudoknots that exist in
.I <f> 
to the output alignment. 

.TP 
.B --rf
Must be used in combination with 
.BI --withali " <f>".
Specify that the alignment in 
.I <f> 
has the same "#=GC RF" annotation as the alignment file the CM was
built from using
.B cmbuild
and further that the 
.B --rf 
option was supplied to 
.B cmbuild
when the CM was constructed.

.TP 
.BI --gapthresh " <x>"
Must be used in combination with 
.BI --withali " <f>".
Specify that the 
.BI --gapthresh " <x>"
option was supplied to 
.B cmbuild
when the CM was constructed from the alignment file
.I <f>.

.TP 
.BI --cm-idx " <n>"
If 
.I cmfile
contains more than 1 CM, specify that only CM number 
.I <n>
be used for alignment.

.TP 
.BI --cm-name " <s>"
If 
.I cmfile
contains more than 1 CM, specify that only the CM named
.I <s>
be used for alignment.

.TP
.BI --tfile " <f>"
Dump tabular sequence tracebacks for each individual
sequence to a file 
.I <f>.
Primarily useful for debugging.

.TP
.BI --ifile " <f>"
Dump per-sequence insert information to file
.I <f>.
The format of the file is described by "#"-prefixed comment lines
included at the top of the file
.I <f>.
The insert information is valid even when the 
.B --matchonly 
option is used.

.TP
.BI --elfile " <f>"
Must be used in combination with 
.B -l. 
Dump per-sequence EL state (local end) insert information to file
.I <f>.
The format of the file is described by "#"-prefixed comment lines
included at the top of the file
.I <f>.
The EL insert information is valid even when the 
.B --matchonly 
option is used.




















