.TH "cmscore" 1 "@RELEASEDATE@" "@PACKAGE@ @RELEASE@" "@PACKAGE@ Manual"

.SH NAME
.TP 
cmscore - align and score one or more sequences to a CM

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B cmscore
.I [options]
.I cmfile
.I seqfile

.SH DESCRIPTION

.B cmscore
uses the
covariance model (CM) in
.I cmfile
to align and score the sequences in
.I seqfile,
and output summary statistics on timings and scores.
.B cmscore 
is a testbed 
for new CM alignment algorithms, and it is also used by the testsuite.
It is not intended to be particularly useful in the real world. Documentation
is provided for completeness, and to aid our own memories.

.PP
.B cmscore
aligns the sequence(s) in
.I seqfile 
using two 
alignment algorithms and compares the scores and timings of each algorithm. By
default the two algorithms compared are the divide and conquer (D&C) CYK algorithm 
(SR Eddy, BMC Bioinformatics 3:18, 2002), and the HMM banded standard
CYK algorithm. 
When the
.B --std
option is enabled D&C CYK is compared with the standard CYK alignment algorithm.
In this case, because both algorithms should find the optimal
alignment the parsetree scores should be nearly identical (within 0.01
bits), if this is not the case for any sequence
.B cmscore
exits and prints an error message. 
When the
.B --hmmviterbi 
option is enabled D&C CYK is compared with Viterbi alignment to a CM
Plan 9 HMM constructed to be maximally similar to the CM. 

While non-banded CYK variants are guaranteed to find the optimal
alignment and score of each sequence, HMM banded CYK sacrifices
this guarantee for acceleration. The level of acceleration can be
controlled by the tau parameter, which is set with the
.BI --tau " <x>"
option. This is described in more detail in the man page for
.B cmalign, 
but in short, 
.I <x>
is a rough estimate at the probability that the optimal alignment will be
missed. The greater
.I <x> 
is, the greater the acceleration, but the greater the chance of
missing the optimal alignment. By default tau is set as 1E-7.
.B cmscore
is useful for testing for values of tau that give the best
trade-off between acceleration versus accuracy.
To make this testing easier, multiple tau values can be tested within
a single cmscore call. The 
.BI --taus " <x>"
and
.BI --taue " <x>"
option combination allow the user to specify a beginning tau
value and an ending tau value. For example, 
.BI --taus " 3"
and
and
.BI --taue " 5"
would first align the sequences in 
.I seqfile
with non-banded D&C CYK, and then perform 3 additional HMM banded alignments, first with
tau=1E-3, next with tau=1E-4 and finally with
tau=1E-5. Currently, only
values of 1E-<x> can be used. Summary statistics on timings and how
often the optimal alignment is missed for each value or tau are
printed to stdout.

.PP
When comparing the non-banded standard CYK and D&C CYK
algorithms with the 
.B --std
option, the two parse trees
should usually be identical for any sequence, because the optimal alignment
score is guaranteed. However, there can be cases of ties, where two or
more different parse trees have identical scores. In such cases, it is
possible for the two parse trees to differ. The parse tree selected
as "optimal" from amongst the ties is arbitrary, dependent on order of
evaluation in the DP traceback, and the order of evaluation for D&C
vs. standard CYK is different.  Thus, in its testsuite role,
.B cmscore 
checks that the scores are within 0.01 bits of each other, but
does not check that the parse trees are absolutely identical.

.PP
Currently, the sequence file must be in FASTA format.

.PP
The sequences are treated as single stranded RNAs; that is,
only the given strand of each sequence is aligned and scored, and
no reverse complementing is done.

.PP
CM files are profiles of RNA consensus secondary structure. A
CM file is produced by the 
.B cmbuild 
program, from a given RNA sequence alignment of known 
consensus structure.

.SH OPTIONS

.TP
.B -h
Print brief help; includes version number and summary of
all options, including expert options.

.TP
.BI -n <n>
Set the number of sequences to generate and align to 
.I <n>.
This option is incompatible with the
.B --infile
option.

.TP
.B -l
Turn on the local alignment algorithm, which allows the alignment
to span two or more subsequences if necessary (e.g. if the structures
of the query model and target sequence are only partially shared),
allowing certain large insertions and deletions in the structure
to be penalized differently than normal indels.
The default is to globally align the query model to the target
sequences.

.TP
.B -l
Turn on the local alignment algorithm, which allows the alignment
to span two or more subsequences if necessary (e.g. if the structures
of the query model and target sequence are only partially shared),
allowing certain large insertions and deletions in the structure
to be penalized differently than normal indels.
The default is to globally align the query model to the target
sequences.

.TP
.BI -s " <n>"
Set the random seed to 
.I <n>, 
where <n> is a positive integer. The default is to use time() to
generate a different seed for each run, which means that two different
runs of 
.B cmscore
on the same CM will give different
results. You can use this option to generate reproducible results.
The random number generator is used to generate sequences to score,
so 
.B -s
is incompatible with the
.B --infile 
option which supplies the sequences to score in an input file.

.TP
.B -a
Print individual timings and score comparisons for each sequence in 
.I seqfile. 
By default only summary statistics are printed.

.TP
.B --iins
Turn off the default 
behavior of setting all CM insert emission scores to 0.0 bits prior to
alignment. This default behavior originated in 
.B cmsearch 
to avoid high-scoring hits to low complexity sequence favored by high 
insert state emission scores and is applied to
.B cmalign
for consistency. When 
.B --iins
is enabled the insert emission scores are read from
.I cmfile
that were calculated in 
.B cmbuild 
and are unmodified prior to emitting sequences.

.TP
.BI --sub
Turn on the sub model construction and alignment procedure. For each
sequence, an HMM is first used to predict the model start and end
consensus columns, and a new sub CM is constructed that only models
consensus columns from start to end. The sequence is then aligned to this sub CM.
This option is useful for aligning sequences that are known to
truncated, non-full length sequences.
This "sub CM" procedure is not the same as the "sub CMs" described by
Weinberg and Ruzzo.
When used in combination with 
.B --tfile
the parsetree printed is not the sub CM parsetree, but rather the sub
CM parstree mapped onto the topology of the original CM. This mapped
parsetree will likely have a different score (sometimes much worse)
than the sub CM parsetree, both of those scores are printed to the
parsetree file for each sequence.

.TP
.BI --mxsize " <x>"
Set the maximum allowable DP matrix size to 
.I <x>
megabytes. By default this size is 256 Mb. 
This should be large enough for the most alignments, 
however if it is not 
.B cmscore
will exit prematurely and report an error message that 
the matrix exceeded it's maximum allowable size. In this case, the
.B --mxsize 
can be used to raise the limit, or if
.B --std 
is enabled, the 
.B --scoreonly 
option will solve the memory issue.
This memory error is most likely to occur when the
.B --std
option is used without the
.B --scoreonly
option, but can still occur when
.B --std
is not used. 

.TP
.BI --mpi
Run as an MPI parallel program. This option will only be available if
This option will only be available if @PACKAGE@ has been configured
and built with the "--enable-mpi" flag (see User's Guide for details).

.SH EXPERT OPTIONS

.TP
.B --emit
Generate sequences to score by sampling from the CM. 
This option is on by default. The number of sequences generated is
10 by default but can be changed with the 
.B -n
option. The sequences generated from the CM can be saved to an output file
in FASTA format with the 
.B --outfile
option.

.TP
.B --random
Generate sequences to score by sampling from the CMs null
distribution. This option turns the 
.B --emit
option off.
By default the CM distribution will be 0.25 for each of the
four RNA nucleotides, but it may be different if the
.B --null
option was used when
.B cmbuild 
created the 
.I cmfile.
The length of the sequences generated is sampled from the length
distribution of the CM. The average length of the random sequences 
will be the consensus length of the RNA family modelled by
the CM (or very close to it).
The number of sequences generated is
10 by default but can be changed with the 
.B -n
option. The random sequences generated can be saved to an output file
in FASTA format with the 
.B --outfile
option.

.TP
.BI --infile <f>
Sequences to score are read from the file
.I <f>.
All the sequences from 
.I <f> are read and scored, the
.B -n
and
.B -s 
options are incompatible with
.B --infile.


.TP
.BI --outfile <f>
Save generated sequences that are scored to the file
.I <f>
in FASTA format.
This option is incompatible with the 
.B --infile
option.

.TP 
.B --hbanded
Specify that the second stage alignment algorithm be HMM banded CYK. 
This option is on by default. For more information on this option, 
see the description of the
.B --hbanded 
option in the man page for 
.B cmalign. 

.TP
.BI --tau " <x>"
For stage 2 alignment, set the tail loss probability used during HMM band calculation to
.I <x>. 
This is the amount of probability mass within the HMM posterior
probabilities that is considered negligible. The default value is 1E-7.
In general, higher values will result in greater acceleration, but
increase the chance of missing the optimal alignment due to the HMM
bands.

.TP
.B --hsafe
For stage 2 HMM banded alignment,
realign any sequences with a negative alignment
score using non-banded CYK to guarantee finding the optimal
alignment. 

.TP
.B --nonbanded
Specify that the second stage alignment algorithm be standard,
non-banded, non-D&C CYK. When 
.B --nonbanded
is enabled, the program fails with a non-zero exit code and prints an
error message if the parsetree
score for any sequence from stage 1 D&C alignment and stage 2
alignment differs by more than 0.01 bits. In theory, this should never
happen as both algorithms are guaranteed to determine the optimal parsetree.
For larger RNAs (more than 300 residues) if memory is limiting,
.B --nonbanded 
should be used in combination with 
.B --scoreonly.

.TP
.B --scoreonly
With 
.B --nonbanded
during the second stage standard non-banded CYK alignment, use the  "score only" variant 
of the algorithm to save memory, and don't recover a parse tree. 

.TP
.B --hmmviterbi
Specify that the second stage alignment algorithm be Viterbi to a CM
Plan 9 HMM. 
.TP
.BI --taus " <n>"
Specify the first alignment algorithm as non-banded D&C CYK, and
multiple stages of HMM banded CYK alignment. The first HMM banded
alignment will use tau=1E-<x>, which will be the highest value of tau
used.  Must be used in combination with
.B --taue.

.TP
.BI --taue " <n>"
Specify the first alignment algorithm as non-banded D&C CYK, and
multiple stages of HMM banded CYK alignment. The final HMM banded
alignment will use tau=1E-<x>, which will be the lowest value of tau
used.  Must be used in combination with
.B --taus.


.TP
.BI --regress " <f>"
Save regression test information to a file
.I <f>. 
This is part of the automated testing procedure at each release. 

.TP
.BI --tfile " <f>"
Print the parsetrees for each alignment of each sequence to file
.I <f>.

.TP
.BI --stall
Stall the program immediately after starting up to allow a user
to attach a debugging tool such as gdb to the process.
Developed for debugging under MPI parallelization, which is turned on
with the 
.B --mpi
option.  This option will only be available if @PACKAGE@ has been configured
and built with the "--enable-mpi" flag (see User's Guide for details).



