IMPORTANT DISCLAIMER REGARDING PACKAGES INCLUDED WITHIN INFERNAL

Some programs or functions within the Infernal package rely on
other third-party packages and/or libraries.  Whenever possible,
these packages are bundled with Infernal for ease of use and
installation.  The included versions of these packages are the
ones that have been tested and are known to be compatible with
Infernal.  They may or may not be the most current versions of
said packages.  If desired, the user have Infernal interface 
with a different locally installed version of the package,
however, we can make no guarantees about compatibility and 
interoperability with versions other than those distributed with
Infernal.

This is particularly relevant to the 'rigfilters' sub-package.
The rigorous filtering programs written by Zasha Weinberg rely
on two external libraries.  CFSQP is a non-linear programming
library; its license terms do not allow us to distribute the
complete library in this package - the primary source file must
be obtained by the end-user (freely available for academic
purposes, though).  http://www.aemdesign.com

The other package is lp_solve (a linear programming library).
Version 4.0.1.0 of this software is currently distributed with
Infernal.  Some later versions of the package, namely 4.0.1.11
and 5.1 have been tested and are KNOWN INCOMPATIBLE.  The cm2hmm
program will NOT be able to create appropriate filters if it
is linked to these particularly versions of these libraries, and
this will likely apply to future versions of this package as 
well.  For this reason we strongly recommend relying on the 
packaged version of lp_solve and not using a different locally
installed version instead.
