.TH "cm2hmm" 1 "@RELEASEDATE@" "@PACKAGE@ @RELEASE@" "@PACKAGE@ Manual"

.SH NAME
.TP 
cm2hmm - build a rigorous HMM-based filter from an existing covariance model (CM)

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B cm2hmm
.I cmfile
.I hmmfile
.I background [background parameters]
.I HMMtype
.I optimizer [optimizer parameters]

.SH DESCRIPTION

.B cm2hmm
reads a covariance model (CM) from
.I cmfile,
constructs a hidden-Markov model (HMM) that preserves some
information of the CM
and saves the HMM to
.I hmmfile.
The HMM can be used as a rigorous pre-filtering step to
searching with the CM.

.PP
The CM file must be in the standard format output used by Infernal.


.SH OPTIONS

.TP
.B --help
Print brief help; includes summary of command-line parameters.

.TP
.BI background " [background parameters]"
Select the model of background sequence.
.B uniform
gives all bases equal probability (25%).
.BI gc " <fraction>"
specifies the G+C content.
.I <fraction>
should be a number between 0 and 1.
.BI file " <filename>"
loads the base distribution from a file in a specific format.

.TP
.B HMMtype
Specify the type of HMM to be used; options are
.B compact
and
.B expanded.
Compact-type models are generally faster, but expanded-type
models may provide better filtering.

.TP
.BI optimizer " [optimizer parameters]"
Specify which mathematical optimizer is to be used to create 
the final model.  Currently the only option is
.B cfsqp
which takes two paramters:
.I <B> <C>.
B=0, C=1 are reasonable choices.  (See the CFSQP manual for
further details.)


