.TH "sse_cmsearch" 1 "@RELEASEDATE@" "@PACKAGE@ @RELEASE@" "@PACKAGE@ Manual"

.SH NAME
.TP
sse_cmsearch - search a sequence database for RNAs homologous to a CM using an SSE implementation

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B sse_cmsearch
.I [options]
.I cmfile
.I seqfile

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B sse_cmsearch
uses the covariance model (CM) in
.I cmfile
to search for homologous RNAs in 
.I seqfile,
and outputs high-scoring alignments,
using a structural filter pipeline 
implemented with SSE parallel code.

.PP
Currently, the sequence file must be in FASTA format.

.PP
CMs are profiles of RNA consensus sequence and secondary structure. A
CM file is produced by the 
.B cmbuild 
program, from a given RNA sequence alignment of known 
consensus structure.
CM files must be calibrated prior to running 
.B sse_cmsearch
with the 
.B cmcalibrate 
program. Searches with calibrated CM files will include
E-values and will use appropriate filter thresholds for
acceleration. 
CM calibration is described in more detail 
in chapters 5 and 6 of the User's Guide.

.PP
.B sse_cmsearch
output is designed for processing by the 
.B cmsearch_dual 
script;
.B --glbf 3
gives coordinates and scores of the final results list.

.SH OPTIONS

.TP
.B -h
Print brief help, including summary of available options.

.TP
.BI -Z " <x>"
Calculate E-values as if the target database size was 
.I <x> 
megabases (Mb). Ignore the actual size of the database.

.TP 
.B --toponly
Only search the top (Watson) strand of the sequences in
.I seqfile.
By default, both strands are searched.

.TP
.BI --s1-F " <x>"
Set stage 1 cutoff to estimated filter pass rate
.I <x>,
where 
.I <x>
is a real number between 0 and 1.

.TP
.BI --s2-P " <x>"
Set stage 2 cutoff to a p-value of 
.I <x>,
where 
.I <x>
is a real number between 0 and 1.

.TP
.BI --s3-E " <x>"
Set stage 2 cutoff to a e-value of 
.I <x>,
where 
.I <x>
is a positive real number.

